Improve pkgdown articles; add a new article on filling layouts (#498)
rstudio/bslib: vignettes/sidebars.Rmd

---
title: "Sidebars"

> output:
>   html_document:
>     theme:
>       version: 5

Author: Is this needed? Or just for your own development? FWIW, I use something like `nodemon --exec ./build.sh --watch vignettes --ext Rmd` (with `build.sh` containing something like `R -e "pkgdown::build_article('sidebars')"`

(If you have a better "hot reloading" setup feel free to let me know :))

```suggestion
```

  border: var(--bs-border-width) solid var(--bs-border-color);
  margin-bottom: 4rem;
  box-shadow:
    rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.25) 0px 54px 55px,
    rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.12) 0px -12px 30px,
    rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.12) 0px 4px 6px,
    rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.17) 0px 12px 13px,
    rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.09) 0px -3px 5px;
}

iframe {
  margin-bottom: calc(55px + 2rem);
}

iframe.resizable {
  resize: vertical;
  min-height: 300px;
}

.card-header.bg-info code {
  background: none;
  color: hsl(209deg, 85%, 25%);
}
```

::: lead
Sidebar layouts in web interfaces allow your users to easily access filters, settings and other inputs alongside the interactive features they control.
In this article, you'll learn how to create sidebar layouts with bslib.
:::

## Introduction

> To create a sidebar layout, provide a `sidebar()` to the `sidebar` argument of one of the following functions.

Author: You're probably aware of this, and I'm not sure how best to address it, but I find this sentence a little bit awkward (since you have to keep reading through multiple paragraphs to see what functions you're referencing). Maybe you could mention/summarize them in a sentence or two?

Reviewer: Hmm, maybe something like this?

```suggestion
To create a sidebar layout, provide a `sidebar()` to the `sidebar` argument to `layout_sidebar()` or any of the `navs_` or `page_` functions that support sidebars.
```

:::: {.row}
::: {.col-sm-12 .col-lg-6}
### Shared Sidebar {#intro-shared-sidebar}

> When `sidebar` is an argument to a function containing multiple pages or panels, it creates a **[shared sidebar](#shared-sidebar)**.

Author: Since you use tabs below, better to be consistent

```suggestion
When `sidebar` is an argument to a function containing multiple pages or tabs, it creates a **[shared sidebar](#shared-sidebar)**.
```

Provide a `sidebar()` to `page_navbar()` to recreate the classic [shinydashboard](http://rstudio.github.io/shinydashboard/) look with a global sidebar [shared across several pages](#navbar-pages).

You can also add a [shared sidebar to a card with tabs or pills](#card-tabs-shared-sidebar) created with `navs_tab_card()` or `navs_pill_card()`.
:::

::: {.col-sm-12 .col-lg-6 .text-center .mt-2 .mt-lg-4}
```{r preview-page-navbar, echo = FALSE}
describe_layout_function(
  "page_navbar()",
  "A shared sidebar in a multi-page layout.",
  card_body_fillable(
    class = "p-0",
    height = 200,
    id = "page_navbar_example_card",
    navs_bar(
      collapsible = FALSE,
      fillable = TRUE,
      sidebar = sidebar("Shared sidebar", width = "33%", class = "bg-light"),
      nav("Page 1", "Page 1 content"),
      nav("Page 2", "Page 2 content")
    ),
    tags$script(HTML("$(document).ready(function() {
      var demo_nav = $('#page_navbar_example_card nav.navbar');

>       setTimeout(function(){ demo_nav.headroom('destroy') }, 100);

Author: Why is this needed? If it is, can we add a comment about why it is? (and also, maybe, check that headroom is on the page before using it since it's a pkgdown thing?)

Reviewer: Oh right, yeah it's pkgdown thing where pkgdown enables headroom for anything that matches `nav.navbar`. That probably should be made a little more specific in pkgdown, but I'll add a comment here and check `.headroom` before calling `'destroy'`.

    });"))
  ) |>
  tagAppendAttributes(class = "flex-row", .cssSelector = ".navbar-nav") |>
  tagAppendAttributes(class = "d-none", .cssSelector = ".navbar-header") |>
  tagAppendAttributes(class = "navbar-dark", .cssSelector = "nav")
)
```

```{r preview-navs-tab-card, echo = FALSE}
describe_layout_function(
  c("navs_tab_card()", "navs_pill_card()"),
  "A shared sidebar for tabs within a card.",
  card_body_fillable(
    class = "p-2",
    height = 200,
    navs_tab_card(
      title = "Tab Card",
      sidebar = sidebar("Shared sidebar", width = "33%", class = "bg-light"),
      nav("Tab 1", "Tab 1 content"),
      nav("Tab 2", "Tab 2 content")
    )
  )
)
```
:::
::::

:::: {.row}
::: {.col-sm-12 .col-lg-6}
### Local Sidebar {#intro-local-sidebar}

Use `layout_sidebar()` whenever you want a **[local sidebar](#local-sidebar)** adjacent to a content panel.
`layout_sidebar()` creates a bordered area by default, making it useful anywhere in your interface.

> It also fits nicely into [card components](#cards) and [nav pages or tabs](#navbar-pages) allowing you to add a sidebar to individual pages or tabs.

Author: ```suggestion
It also fits nicely into [card components](#cards) and [nav pages or tabs](#navbar-pages) allowing you to add sidebar(s) within individual pages or tabs.
```

:::

::: {.col-sm-12 .col-lg-6 .text-center .mt-2 .mt-lg-4}
```{r preview-layout-sidebar, echo = FALSE}
describe_layout_function(
  "layout_sidebar()",
  "A flexible, local sidebar layout.",
  card_body_fillable(
    class = "p-2",
    height = 200,

>     layout_sidebar(
>       sidebar = sidebar("Local sidebar", width = "33%", class = "bg-light"),
>       "Content with a sidebar"
>     )

Author: The border/border-radius is removed/changes since it's within a card, but you can add them back these utility classes

```suggestion
    layout_sidebar(class = "border rounded-top",
      sidebar = sidebar("Local sidebar", width = "33%", class = "bg-light"),
      "Content with a sidebar"
    )
```

  )
)
```
:::
::::

::: {.callout .callout-warning}
<h3 data-toc-skip>Prefer local sidebars</h3>

Although [shared sidebars](#shared-sidebar) have been popularized by packages like [shinydashboard](http://rstudio.github.io/shinydashboard/), they're not always ideal for creating a good user experience.

As a general rule, group sidebar controls as closely as possible with the contents they affect.
Use `layout_sidebar()` to group inputs in a [local sidebar](#local-sidebar) adjacent to the output they control.

> Use global sidebars sparingly and only when the inputs in them are use across many outputs on your page.

Author: ```suggestion
Use global sidebars sparingly and only when their controls effect all the outputs on the page.
```

Note that while we talk about shared and local sidebars in this article, those are properties of the interface design.

> Controls placed in a sidebar aren't inherently limited affecting only the outputs next to the sidebar.

Author: ```suggestion
Controls placed in a sidebar aren't inherently limited to affecting only the outputs next to the sidebar.
```
